---
tags:
  - NLP
  - tps
---
## [[TD1 Corrigé]]
# Natural Language Semantics 2024
## Exercises 1
### <center>8 October 2024</center>

## 1. CFG and AB

### 1.1 Parenthesis grammar

Take the following context-free grammar G. L(G), the language generated by G, consists of sequences of balanced brackets, with *a* the opening bracket ‘(’, and *b* the closing bracket ‘)’.

$$
S \rightarrow a S b S \quad ; \quad S \rightarrow \epsilon \tag{1}
$$

Given these rules, the empty sequence $$\epsilon$$ belongs to L(G). For L(G) \ {$$\epsilon$$} (the same language without the empty string), we can create a lexicalised version G' with the following rules (2). The sign $$|$$ is used to compactly display alternative rewrite possibilities.

$$
S \rightarrow a B \; | \; a S B \; | \; a B S \; | \; a S B S \quad B \rightarrow b \tag{2}
$$

The rules of G' are in Greibach normal form: every rule introduces exactly one terminal symbol, and this is the first symbol after the arrow.

**Exercise**: Translate the rewrite rules of (2) to AB formulas for the terminal symbols *a* and *b*.

---

### 1.2 An AB grammar for logical formulas

Consider the following context-free grammar:

$$
S \rightarrow \neg \land S S \; | \; \neg S \; | \; p \; | \; q \; | \; r
$$

It generates formulae in a minimal logical language containing only the propositions *p*, *q*, and *r*, the unary logical symbol $$\neg$$ and the binary logical symbol $$\land$$. It has the property that it generates expressions in Polish prefix notation. For example, $$\neg \land \neg p \neg q$$ is an expression generated by this grammar corresponding to the more usual infix notation $$\neg (p \land \neg q)$$, which would be generated by the context-free grammar below.


$$
S \rightarrow (\land S S) \; | \; \neg S \; | \; p \; | \; q \; | \; r
$$

An advantage of Polish prefix notation is that it does not require any brackets, though people not used to it tend to find it hard to read.

### Exercises

1. Give an AB lexicon which generates the language of the Polish prefix context-free grammar at the start of this exercise.

2. Give a lexicon which generates the language of the infix notation context-free grammar. *Hint*: assign types to the brackets as well as to the logical symbols.

---

### 1.3 Mystery grammar

Look at the following grammar in Greibach normal form. Terminal symbols are 0, 1.

$$
S \rightarrow 0 B \; | \; 1 A \\
B \rightarrow 1 \; | \; 1 S \; | \; 0 B B \\
A \rightarrow 0 \; | \; 0 S \; | \; 1 A A \tag{3}
$$

### Exercises

1. What is the language generated by this grammar? How many sequences of length 6 does it generate?

2. Translate the rules of (3) into AB formulas.

3. The sequence 001101 is ambiguous. Give two different AB derivation trees for this sequence.
## 2. AB grammars and natural language

### 2.1 Alice in Wonderland

**Exercises**: Assume the words *Alice*, *Tweedledum*, and *Tweedledee* are assigned the formula np, and that *rabbit*, *hatter*, *queen*, *song*, and *gryphon* are assigned the formula n. Give the missing formula assignment and derivations of the following sentences.

1. Alice dreams.
2. The rabbit never dreams.
3. Tweedledum irritates Tweedledee.
4. The Mad Hatter teases the Red Queen.
5. The rabbit considers Alice slow.
6. Alice likes the song of the Gryphon.
7. She likes Tweedledee.
8. Tweedledee likes her.
9. The Hatter who teases Alice.

---

## 2.2 Coordination

**Exercises**: The word ‘and’ can be used in many different types of sentences. Give AB derivations for the following English sentences.

1. Ben and Amy visited Paris.
2. Ben visited and disliked London.
3. Amy went to England and visited London.
4. Amy went to Paris and to London.
5. All students and professors like the new library.
6. Chris reads all new and interesting books.

What can you say about the different uses of ‘and’ in the examples above?
